---
title: "How to Git"
date: 2017-09-30T11:00:00+07:00
tags: ["git", "version-control"]
---
>Git is the most popular version control system used now. Being distributed in contrast with its counterpart svn make git more flexible, reliable, and convenient to use for development. Here are basic things you'll do in git.
<!--more-->

# How to Git
Git workflow and branching
**note: not necessarily in step(ini ga harus berurutan)*

## Initialization

Initialize Git repo inside project folder.

    git init



## Add Remote URL
    git remote add <remote_alias> <remote_URL>

‘<remote_alias>’: alias for remote url, e.g *origin*
‘<remote_URL’: remote url taken from git remote server. 
Example remote url: *https://prdc-support.anabatic.com:7443/git/admin.emporia/edr-eksporaja.git*



## Cloning Repo

Clone repo from remote server to get everything from remote server.
*If you want to clone repo, no need to initialize git using git init.*


    git clone -b <remote_repo_URL>

‘<remote_repo_URL>’: git remote server URL
example: cloning from dev branch: git clone -b dev <url_to_remote_repo>



## Stage Files

Move/Add edited files into ready to commits stage.
*Add all edited files:*

    git add -A

*Add certain edited files:*

    git add <filename>

‘<filename>’: filename

*Add multiple edited files:*

    git add <file-name-1> <file-name-2> <file-name-3>

**note: space separated*  



## Commit Files

Commit files edited using certain commit message.

    git commit -m "commit message"

Multiple line commit message:

    git commit -m "First line
    Second line
    Third line"

**Commit History**

    git log -n

-n : how many commit history you want to see. n is integer. If you just want to see all of them, remove -n. Example: see 4 previous commits → `git log -4`

**Undo Previous Commit**
In case you commit wrong works/files, or you just want to undo your commit:

    git reset HEAD~

it will take your back to state where your previous work will be in unstaged status. Fix them, and re-commit it by `git add -A` and `git commit -m` `"``message commit``"` 

**Check Old Commits**
Say you want  to go back to certain commits in commit history to see what happen there. For example you want to see the code base at the time you commit new feature login. 

Check old commits without creating branch:

    git checkout <commit_hash_code>

Use git log or commit history in remote server to see commit hash code. For example `git checkout 0d1d7fc32` 

Check old commits by creating branch:
`git checkout -b <branch_name> <commit_hash_code>`
Say you want  to check old commits and move it to certain branch.

**Revert Commits**
If you want to undo things in git to specific commit use rever. For example you want to undo file changes in a file to certain commit in history. 

    git revert commit_id/hash

example: git revert efT43g  → will revert/undo any changes related to certain certain files in that specific commit.

**Rollback Commits**

- *Soft* rollback
  If you want to rollback to specific commit but **keep** the files changes, use *soft* rollback. This method won’t alter working directory nor staged directory. Changes from previous committed works will resides in staged directory and now working changes still in working directory. Use this method to change previous commit message. 
  Stage Directory → Changes between Original HEAD to commit rollback.
  Working Directory → Won’t be touched.
    git reset --soft <tag/branch/commit_has_code>


- *Mixed* rollback
  Same with *soft* rollback, but previous committed changes will be in working directory as modified. The stage directory will be matched to HEAD/commit we rollback to.
  Stage Directory → All staged files for the commit we rollback to.
  Working Directory → Changes between Original Head to commit rollback
    git reset --mixed <tag/branch/commit_has_code>


- *Hard* rollback
  Delete everything you worked on from current head to commit you want to rollback to. Matching everything as that commit condition.
    git reset --hard <tag/branch/commit_has_code>
  

source for rollback commit: 

- https://davidzych.com/difference-between-git-reset-soft-mixed-and-hard/
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3528245/whats-the-difference-between-git-reset-mixed-soft-and-hard
- https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/resetting-checking-out-and-reverting


## Tag

To label your certain commit for easy tracking, for example version number tag.
**Create Tag**
To tag recent commit on **current** branch:
*unannotated:*

    git tag <tag>

*annotated:*

    git tag -a <tag> -m "tag message"

To tag recent commit on **other** branch:
*unannotated*:

    git tag <tag> <branch_name>

*annotated:*

    git tag -a <tag> <branch_name> -m "tag message"

To tag previous commit:
*unannotated:*

    git tag <tag> <commit_id>

*annotated:*

    git tag -a <tag> <commit_id> -m "tag message"

**Push Tags** 

    git push --tags pdc

**List all Tags**

    git tag


## Push to Remote Server

Push all remotely un-tracked local commits to remote master(default) branch.

    git push <remotealias> <branch_tobe_pushed>

‘<remotealias>’: alias for remote server URL
‘<branch_tobe_pushed>’: e.g master or any branches

**Push Specifically**
Push from specific local branch to specific remote branch

    git push <remotealias> <localbranch>:<remotebranch> 

e.g: git push origin dev:dev
push from local branch dev to remote branch dev

**Push Force**
Forcefully push your local into remote server and make local identical with remote repo(timpa)

    git push -f <remotealias> <localbranch>:<remotebranch>


Git Status
Check on what branch you are and status of unstaged/staged and committed/uncommited files.

    git status


## Git Branches

**Create Branch**
Create branch locally and check that branch immediately:

    git checkout -b <branch_name>

Create branch locally without checking it out:

    git branch -d <branch_name>

**Checkout Branch**
Checkout to already created branch.

    git checkout <branch_name>

**List Branches**
List all created branches locally

    git branch -v

List all branches locally and remotely

    git branch -a

**Rename Branch**
Rename current checked branch

    git branch -m <newname>

Rename another branch

    git branch -m <oldname> <newname>

**Delete Local Branch**
Delete unnecessary branch

    git branch -d <branchname>

Let say you don’t need that branch anymore because it has already merged into main branch.

**Delete Remote Branch**

    git push <remote> --delete <branch_name>

**Temporary Branch**
Let say you want to go back to certain commit id and want to work from there but maintaining the original head. 

    git checkout -b <temp-branch-name> <commit_id>


## Merge Branch

Merge certain branch into other branch.
Let say we want to merge current feature branch(*f-branch*) we already finished into *dev* branch:

- First checkout branch you want your other branch to merge into(example dev):
    git checkout dev


- Then do the merge
    git merge --no-ff <branchname_tobe_merged>

e.g: *git merge f-branch* 
example above will merge *f-branch* onto *dev* branch. *f-branch* is the most updated(with most progresses worked on), and merge into *dev* branch as main development branch.

*note: `--no-ff` option make the merge process keep the history of the branch that was merged. Recommended.

*After merging branch, if you don’t need that branch anymore, it’s recommended to delete that already merged branch into main branch. So in above example, delete branch f-branch(while still in dev branch)*

    git branch -d f-branch



## Git Pull

Pull updates from remote server. Pull take every updates from remote server and automatically merge them into our local works.

    git pull <remotealias> <branch_tobe_pulled>

example: we want to update our local works with already updated remote *dev* branch from our coworker. Let say remote alias name *origin.*
then do `git pull origin dev`



## Git Fetch

Difference between *pull* and *fetch* is that *fetch* only take(download) all commits from remote server into local *without* merging them into our local works. The fetched commits/files will have their own branches as *remote branches* in our local repo so that we can preview things our coworker pushed before without merging them into our local works, fear that they will mess our local works. 

**Fetch All Branches**

    git fetch <remotealias>

Take all branches from remote server.

**Fetch Specific Branch**

    git fetch <remotealias> <branch_tobe_fetched>

Take only specific branch from remote server.

**Git Fetch Use Case**
If you approve those changes your coworker made, merge them into your local works.

Let say our remote server(*origin)* have 3 branches: `master` , `dev` , and `your_friend_branch`.
Your coworker push their works to specific remote branch called `your_friend_branch` , and you want to preview them. You fetch that branch using `git pull origin your_friend_branch`. Your local branches will be like this:

- `master` (default local branch)
- `dev` (your main local development branch)
- `feature-A` (branch you created locally to work on specific feature, e.g login feature)
- `origin/your_friend_branch` (your coworker branch you just fetched. It’s prefixed with its remote name `origin/`. 

Checkout to that branch like normal checkout: `git checkout origin/your_friend_branch` and preview your coworker works before merging. If you're done previewing, merge it by checking out to your branch first(let say you want to merge it with your main dev branch), then do `git merge origin/your_friend_branch`. You branch `dev` will be as updated as your coworker works.



## Git Clone/Fetch Remote to Existing Folder/Files

Let say that your local existing directory git repo is **uninitialized/not a git repo.** You want to clone from remote repo to update your local directory with remote files but keeps your local files. Change Directory to your local directory and do: ****

    git init
    git remote add origin <remote_url>
    git fetch origin dev
    git checkout -b master --track origin/master 
    
    git reset origin/master # or whatever commit you think is proper...

